# Summary

Dataset generator of strain (time series) samples containing phenomenological gravitational waves from core-collapse supernovae added to noise from LIGO-Virgo interferometric detectors. Jupyter notebooks developed in Python and written by Manuel D. Morales (e-mail: <manueld.morales@academicos.udg.mx>).


# Astrophysical details

<b><ins>Interferometric noise</ins></b>

For this implementation, we used real noise from LIGO (L1, H1) and Virgo (V1) interferometric detectors from O3b run. This is a non-Gaussian and non-stationary noise stored in strain time series of 4,096s of duration, sampled at 16384 Hz and 4096 Hz. For our implementation, we choose the second sampling option. Data available on the [Gravitational Wave Open Science Center](https://gwosc.org/).

<b><ins>Phenomenological waveforms</ins></b>

We draw on CCSN phenomenological waveforms. These were generated by the [SignalGenerator_Phen](https://github.com/CesarTiznado/SignalGenerator_Phen) code, following the model first proposed by [Astone et al Phys. Rev. D 98, 122002 (2018)](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.98.122002). This simplified stochastic non-physical model mimics one of the features common in GW signals obtained from all multi-dimensional general relativistic CCSN simulations, namely the high-frequency feature (HFF). In the time-frequency representation (such as that provided by spectrograms and scalograms), the HFF has an increasing monotonically frequency profile in time, which, at first order, can be considered linear. We draw on three sets of phenomenological waveforms:

- 200 waveforms with 1,620 =< HFF slope =< 4,990 (class 1)
- 200 waveforms with 1,450 =< HFF slope < 1,620 (class 2)
- 200 waveforms with 950 =< HFF slope < 1,450 (class 3)

# Implementation structure

```
datagen-sngw-phen
|___ Codes
     |___ Noise_Explorer.ipynb
     |___ Prepare_Waveforms.ipynb
     |___ Process_PhenWaveforms.ipynb
     |___ Toolbox.py
     |___ WaveformPhen_Explorer.ipynb
|___ Datasets
|___ Waveforms_mod
     |___ Phen
|___ Waveforms_orig
     |___ Phen
|___ LICENCE
|___ README.md
```

Run the Jupyter notebooks in the following order:

`Noise_Explorer.ipynb` for downloading interferometric noise data from LIGO and Virgo detectors (segments of 4,096 s), exploring time series and power spectral densities, and locally saving noise segments. Open data was obtained from the website of the GWOSC.

`WaveformPhen_Explorer.ipynb` for analyzing three representative waveforms; exploring their morphologies in the time domain and the time-frequency domain. Spectrograms (applying short-time Fourier transform) and scalograms (applying Morlet wavelet transform) are plotted.

`Prepare_Waveforms.ipynb` for resampling and rescaling all phenomenological waveforms, resulting in dimensionless strain time series with a sampling frequency of 4,094Hz. Modified waveforms are saved as dictionaries, separated by class.

`Process_PhenWaveforms.ipynb` for applying injections, data conditioning (whitened, band-pass filtering), and generating a dataset of window strain samples. Each one of these windows has the same length Twin<4,096s, contains noise plus a phenomenological waveform, and is saved in a .txt file. In addition, a log.dat file is saved which contains information about injected signals in all windows.

In addition, the file `Toolbox.py` is included, which contains specific functions for the notebooks.

# Important instructions

1. All scripts were run locally, and in some cells, you will need to edit path locations. The set of 600 phenomenological waveforms used in this work is available in the public folder Waveforms_orig. Once you download this folder, locate it in your local machine as shown in the tree of the previous section.

2. In the input of `Prepare_Waveforms.ipynb` script, you can change the rescaling factor (Resc_factor) to change the SNR values of injected signals. It should be stressed that, depending on the noise realization, the distribution of SNR values can be displaced as shown in `Populations.ipynb` script.

3. To vary the length of the windows

4. Before run `Process_PhenWaveforms.ipynb` to perform injections along a whole noise segment of 4,096 s), it is highly recommended to apply them only on a small segment of a few tens of seconds. To perform this first check, you need to...


